[SYCL] Documentation for Clang driver and core language support. (#170602)
llvm/llvm-project: clang/docs/SYCLSupport.rst

possibilities, examples of which include:

- A SYCL run-time library written in standard C++ that executes kernels on a
  homogeneous set of host and device processors, each of which can execute
  common compiled code from shared memory.
- A SYCL run-time library that executes kernels on a heterogeneous set of
  device processors for which each kernel is pre-compiled for each supported
  device processor (Ahead-Of-Time (AOT) compilation) or for a family of device
  processors (Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation).

Since Clang is a conforming implementation of the C++ standard, no additional
features are required for support of the first implementation strategy.
This document details the core language features Clang provides for use by
SYCL run-time libraries that use the second implementation strategy.

.. _SYCL-2020:
   https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html

Example Usage
=============
SYCL is designed as an extension of C++ rather than as a distinct programming
language.
SYCL support is enabled with the `-fsycl <opt-fsycl_>`_ option.

.. code-block:: sh

   clang++ -c -fsycl source-file.cpp

> The choice of which target devices will be supported is made at compile time.

Reviewer: No. I don't see this option in https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/include/clang/Options/Options.td. It should be easy to add. My understanding is that this option is an alias to an existing `--offload-targets` option.

By default, SYCL source files will be compiled with support for a host target

> dependent set of target devices.

Reviewer 2: Are you trying to say that the device targets depend on the host?

For example, when compiling for a ``x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`` host target,
target support will be enabled for ``spirv64-unknown-unknown`` devices.
The set of supported target devices can be specified via a comma separated list
of target triples with the `--offload-targets= <opt-offload-targets_>`_ option.
The following Clang invocation enables support for AMD, NVIDIA, and Intel GPU
targets.

.. code-block:: sh

   clang++ -c -fsycl \
     --offload-targets=amdgcn-amd-amdhsa,nvptx64-nvidia-cuda,spirv64-unknown-unknown \
     source-file.cpp

Object files built with the `-fsycl <opt-fsycl_>`_ option contain device

> images that require additional processing at link time.

Reviewer 3: Confirmed - use of `-fno-gpu-rdc` when building the object with `-c` will perform device linking during the compilation step.

   https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-offload-targets

Compilation Model
=================
`SYCL 2020 section 5.1, "Offline compilation of SYCL source files" <SYCL-2020-5.1_>`_
acknowledges two compilation models.

- Single-source Multiple Compiler Pass (`SMCP`_) describes a compilation model
  in which source code is separately parsed and analyzed for the host target
  and each device target.

- Single-source Single Compiler Pass (`SSCP`_) describes a compilation model
  in which source code is parsed and analyzed once with code generation
  performed separately for the host target and each device target.

Clang only supports the `SMCP`_ compilation model currently, but the SYCL
language support features have been designed to allow for support of the
`SSCP`_ compilation model to be added in the future.

By default, SYCL source files are compiled for the host target and for each
device target.
In some cases, it is useful to restrict compilation to just the host target or
just the device targets; the `-fsycl-host-only <opt-fsycl-host-only_>`_ and
`-fsycl-device-only <opt-fsycl-device-only_>`_ options are available for these

> purposes.

Author: I can see that. These options already exist as [`-Xarch_<arch>`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-Xarch_-arch), [`-Xarch_device`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang1-Xarch_device), and [`-Xarch_host`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang2-Xarch_host). I'll check if they work. If they do and @mdtoguchi has no concerns, I'll add mention of them.

A related question is whether the documentation should mention `--offload-device-only` and `--offload-host-only` instead of `-fsycl-device-only` and `-fsycl-host-only`. My understanding is that they behave the same but that the direction is to move towards unified options for all the offloading languages.

.. _SMCP:
   https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#subsec:smcp
.. _SSCP:
   https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#subsec:sscp
.. _SYCL-2020-5.1:
   https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_offline_compilation_of_sycl_source_files
.. _opt-fsycl-host-only:
   https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-offload-host-only
.. _opt-fsycl-device-only:
   https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-offload-device-only

Supported Targets
=================
Support for SYCL is still in the implementation phase, but all targets
supported by the `--offload-targets= <opt-offload-targets_>`_ option

> are intended to eventually be supported.

Reviewer 4: Option 1: Support for SYCL is still in the implementation phase, but all targets available through the --offload-targets= <opt-offload-targets_>_ option are intended to eventually work with SYCL.

Option 2: Support for SYCL is still in the implementation phase, but all targets accepted by the --offload-targets= <opt-offload-targets_>_ option are intended to eventually be available for SYCL.

Predefined Macros
=================
`SYCL 2020 section 5.6, "Preprocessor directives and macros" <SYCL-2020-5.6_>`_
specifies macros that a SYCL implementation is required to provide.
Most such macros are defined by the SYCL run-time library and require inclusion
of the ``<sycl/sycl.hpp>`` header file.
The following macros are conditionally predefined by the compiler.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Macro
     - Description
   * - ``__SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__``
     - Predefined by a `SMCP`_ implementation during device compilation (but not
       during host compilation).
   * - ``__SYCL_SINGLE_SOURCE__``
     - Predefined by a `SSCP`_ implementation during (host and device)
       compilation.

Since Clang only supports the `SMCP`_ compilation model currently, the

> ``__SYCL_SINGLE_SOURCE__`` macro is never predefined.

Reviewer: _Just a note FYI. I don't know if any change to this statement is required._

This might be outdated fairly soon. 
CIR code generation supports SSCP compilation model, but it doesn't support SYCL.

.. _SYCL-2020-5.6:
   https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_preprocessor_directives_and_macros

Language Support
================
`SYCL 2020 section 3.12.3, "Library-only implementation" <SYCL-2020-3.12.13_>`_
notes the intent that the SYCL specification be implementable as a C++ library
with no requirements beyond a compiler that conforms to the C++17 standard.
The SYCL specification therefore does not specify extensions to the C++ core
language and a library-only implementation will work with Clang without any
core language extensions.
Clang provides the features described in this section to facilitate capabilities
that are not possible with a library-only SYCL implementation.

.. _SYCL-2020-3.12.13:
   https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_library_only_implementation

.. _sect-sycl_kernel_entry_point:

The ``[[clang::sycl_kernel_entry_point]]`` Attribute
----------------------------------------------------
This attribute is intended for use in the implementation of SYCL run-time

> libraries and should not be used directly by programmers.

Reviewer: I understand what this sentence tries to say, but it implies that people writing implementation of SYCL run-time library are not programmers. :)

```suggestion
libraries and should not be used in any other context.
```

The `sycl_kernel_entry_point <attr-sycl_kernel_entry_point_>`_ attribute
coordinates interaction between Clang and the SYCL run-time library to
facilitate code generation and the execution of a SYCL kernel on a device
that potentially uses an instruction set architecture different from the host.
Consider the following call to the ``sycl::handler::single_task()`` SYCL
kernel invocation function.

.. code-block:: C++

   struct KN;
   void f(sycl::handler &h, sycl::stream &sout, int i) {
     h.single_task<KN>([=] {
       sout << "The value of i is " << i << "\n";
     });
   }

The SYCL kernel is defined by the lambda expression passed to the
``single_task()`` function and is identified by the ``KN`` type passed as the
first template argument.
See
`SYCL 2020 section 4.9.4.2, "SYCL functions for invoking kernels" <SYCL-2020-4.9.4.2_>`_
and
`SYCL 2020 section 5.2, "Naming of kernels" <SYCL-2020-5.2_>`_
for more details.

The `SMCP`_ and `SSCP`_ compilation models require that code generation be
performed for each SYCL kernel for each target device.

> In order for Clang to perform that code generation, it needs to be informed

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need this line.

that a SYCL kernel invocation is present.
The `sycl_kernel_entry_point <attr-sycl_kernel_entry_point_>`_ attribute
provides the means for the SYCL run-time library, which provides the
definition of all SYCL kernel invocation functions, to inform Clang of a SYCL
kernel invocation.
This is accomplished by, in the definition of a SYCL kernel invocation function,

> including a call to a function declared with the attribute.

Reviewer 4: nit
```suggestion
This is accomplished by including, in the definition of a SYCL kernel invocation
function, a call to a function declared with the attribute.
```

Clang is responsible for:

- Validating that all kernel argument types (e.g., the deduced parameter types
  of the ``kernel_entry_point()`` function above) satisfy the requirements
  specified in
  `SYCL 2020 section 4.12.4, "Rules for parameter passing to kernels" <SYCL-2020-4.12.4_>`_.
- Informing the SYCL run-time library of the presence of subobjects of SYCL
  types that require special handling within kernel arguments.
- Generating an offload kernel entry point function for each SYCL kernel for
  each target device, generating a name for it derived from the SYCL kernel
  name, and informing the SYCL run-time library of the generated name.

The SYCL run-time library is responsible for:

- Selecting a device on which to execute the kernel.
- Copying the SYCL kernel object and any other kernel arguments to the device.
- Informing Clang of additional parameters required for the offload kernel
  entry point based on the presence of subobjects of SYCL types that require
  special handling within kernel arguments.
- Scheduling execution of the offload kernel entry point function on the
  selected device.

The SYCL run-time library tasks are expected to be performed in conjunction

> with an offload backend such as liboffload, OpenCL, CUDA, Hip, or Level Zero;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
with an offload backend such as liboffload, OpenCL, CUDA, HIP, or Level Zero;
```

Author: Thank you, fixed in https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/170602/commits/4f3a5cdba2fa9938ab4d67e41bf752155fb71c8b.

> their details are out of scope for this document.

Reviewer 5: It probably makes sense to mention explicitly that SYCL is simply an abstraction layer over some lower level offloading models. I.e. SYCL itself doesn't provide a compiler that emits GPU assembly. SYCL also doesn't provide a library that actually works with the target device directly. There is always some additional proxy layer aka offload backend.

offload kernel entry point function, the kernel arguments, and, for each
subobject of a kernel argument that requires special handling, a reference to
that subobject.
For reasons explained further below, the ``sycl_kernel_launch`` template needs
to know which of its arguments correspond to direct kernel arguments and which
correspond to references to special subobjects within the direct kernel
arguments.
Because there may be multiple kernel arguments with multiple subobjects that
require special handling, and because C++17 does not support function templates
with multiple function parameter packs, an idiom is used to pass the kernel
arguments and special subobjects separately.
This idiom is best explained by way of an example.

Consider the earlier example of a call to ``single_task()`` that passes a
lambda that captures variables of type ``int`` and ``std::stream``.
``std::stream`` is an example of a SYCL type that requires special handling in
kernel arguments.
The call to ``kernel_entry_point<KernelName>(kernelFunc)`` in the implementation
of ``single_task()`` results in an implicit call to ``sycl_kernel_launch`` that

> looks similar to the following (the access to the captured copy of ``sout`` via

Reviewer: It's a name of the second parameter for function `f` from the example above (see line 176).

``kernelFunc.sout`` is not valid C++ syntax, but the compiler can generate such
accesses).

.. code-block:: C++

   sycl_kernel_launch<KernelName>("kernel-entry-point", kernelFunc)(kernelFunc.sout)

The SYCL kernel name type, ``KernelName``, is passed as an explicit template
type argument for convenient use by the SYCL run-time library if desired.
The first function argument is the name of the offload kernel entry point

> function generated for the SYCL kernel denoted by ``KernelName``.

Reviewer 6: I thought you've mentioned in the past that mangling of the kernel name might be different between targets. How does a single name suffice here? Or am I misremembering?

Author: The direction I have in mind is to use the mangled name as known to the host and to emit a table with the device that maps the host name to the name for that device. This is future work. For now, we're relying on the same mangled name being generated for the host and all devices. I'll resolve this comment for now, but feel free to reopen it.

This argument names the function that the SYCL run-time library, in conjunction
with an offload backend, needs to resolve and execute on the selected device
in order to execute the SYCL kernel.
The remaining arguments, for which there is just one in this case,
``kernelFunc``, are the kernel arguments.
Kernel arguments that contain a special subobject are passed as lvalues; those
that don't are passed as xvalues (and may therefore be moved from though such
types are unlikely to have optimized move operations since they are required to
be bit-copyable types).

> The result of the ``sycl_kernel_launch`` call must be a function object (e.g.,

Reviewer: Can it be a function in addition to a function object?

the result of a lambda expression, potentially one that captures references to
the kernel arguments).
The special subobjects are then passed as lvalues in an invocation of the
resulting function object.
This is the idiom mentioned earlier; this effectively allows for a call with
two function parameter packs.
A SYCL run-time library is expected to define the ``sycl_kernel_launch``
template in a form similar to this:

.. code-block:: C++

   namespace sycl {
     class handler {
       template <typename KernelName, typename... KernelArgs>
       auto sycl_kernel_launch(const char *entryPointName, KernelArgs &... args) {
         return [&] (auto &... subobjects) {
           // Process the kernel arguments and special subobjects, schedule
           // execution of 'entryPointName' on the selected device, and

>            // return a type-list object sepcifying additional parameters to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
           // return a type-list object specifying additional parameters to
```

Author: Thank you, fixed in https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/170602/commits/4f3a5cdba2fa9938ab4d67e41bf752155fb71c8b.

>            // add to the offload kernel entry point function (see below).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
           // Process the kernel arguments and special subobjects, schedule
           // execution of 'entryPointName' on the selected device
           process(...);
           
           // return a type-list object sepcifying additional parameters to
           // add to the offload kernel entry point function (see below).
```

Subjective, but I think that would slightly increase readability.

           return detail::type_list<...>{};
         };
       }
       ...
     };

>   }

Reviewer 6: IMO, I'd restructure to include this code snippet early and then describe what it does. I was able to follow the description above only because I was already familiar with it.

Reviewer 6: Start with the full snippet and, maybe, repeat parts of it when talking about something specific.

subobjects of those kernel arguments that require special handling.
This is all the information the SYCL run-time library needs from Clang to
fulfill its requirements.

The special handling required for kernel arguments is an implementation detail
of the SYCL run-time library, but may require additional arguments to be passed
to the SYCL kernel.
This means that additional parameters may need to be added to the offload kernel
entry point function that Clang generates.
The SYCL run-time library informs Clang of the additional parameters by
returning a type-list object from the function object returned by the call to
``sycl_kernel_launch``.
A type-list object is a (possibly empty) object with a class template
specialization type; the template arguments for the specialization indicate
the additional parameters, if any, required for the kernel entry point.
The following class is suitable for type-list objects.

.. code-block:: C++

   namespace sycl {
     namespace detail {
       template <typename...>
       class type_list {};
     }
   }

Continuing with the earlier example, assume that the ``sycl::stream`` type holds

> a reference to a buffer and that the SYCL run-time implementation uses an

Author: My intent was to refer to a buffer in a generic sense, not to the `sycl::buffer` class specifically. I can see how that is confusing though. I'm reluctant to pull in other SYCL types for fear that might increase confusion (e.g., does this situation only arise in conjunction with those other SYCL types?). I'll play with the wording to either add some distance from `sycl::buffer` or to change the example in some way.

Clang to inform it of the presence of subobjects of these types within kernel
arguments.
The SYCL run-time library indicates which SYCL types require special handling
by declaring them with the
`sycl_special_kernel_parameter <attr-sycl_special_kernel_parameter_>`_
attribute.

When translating calls to functions declared with the
`sycl_kernel_entry_point <attr-sycl_kernel_entry_point_>`_ attribute, Clang
inspects each kernel argument type to look for data members, catures, and base
classes, that have a type declared with the
`sycl_special_kernel_parameter <attr-sycl_special_kernel_parameter_>`_
attribute.
For each such occurrence, Clang passes a reference to the associated subobject
when constructing the implicit call to the ``sycl_kernel_launch`` template.
See the 
:ref:`sycl_kernel_entry_point <sect-sycl_kernel_entry_point>` section for more
details.

For example, kernel arguments that contain a subobject of
``sycl::local_accessor`` type usually cannot be bit-copied to device memory for
use by a SYCL kernel; additional support from the offload backend is generally
required to manage their associated memory.
A SYCL run-time library implementation might therefore declare this type

> similar to the following.

Author: That is a good question and one I haven't given much consideration to. My immediate reaction is to either make it an error or to communicate both. I lean slightly towards communicating both.

I think communicating only the outer one is workable, but it would create a burden for the SYCL RT to handle and, since failure to handle it would be silent, seems somewhat bug prone. It would be especially difficult for the SYCL RT to handle if the inner type was somehow template dependent.
